so so we have another project that is uh
from am dark who's going to be talking
to you here live with us
um am is an artisan game maker designing
radical tools for social intervention
still in the class war now in the
pandemic he's in the combination class
war and pandemic assistant professor of
performance play and design digital Arts
New Media and critical race and ethnic
studies at UC Santa Cruz dark also
directed the other lab in
interdisciplinary intersectional
feminist research space for experimental
games and New Media dark's recent work
includes yay or nay a Kanye West themed
game about Black Culture fairly
intelligent Tech a speculative algorithm
about inclusive data and the open source
afro hair Library a 3D model database
for black hairstyles and textures dark
holds a ba in design and an MFA in media
arts both from UCLA he has completed
residencies with laboratory NYU Game
Center the open data Institute and the
Frank rachi studio for Creative inquiry
at Carnegie Mellon additionally his work
has been shown internationally and
featured in a variety of Publications
including kill screen Vice and NPR
um and with that I'm so excited to
welcome am
hi
yeah perfectly perfectly
um thank you for that wonderful
introduction I tend to go over and talk
so I appreciate you you doing that for
me um yeah uh hello everyone I can't see
you but I believe you're out there in
The Ether and I'm uh so glad to be here
today
um so yeah I'm gonna be talking about my
project uh the open source afro hair
library and you know it's an interesting
talk to give because
um it's a work in progress and for me
the way that I approach my practice is
usually I'm dealing with some kind of
you know large systemic issue that also
impacts me in on a personal level and
um I tend to think about these problems
and then uh through the process of art
making I'm trying to solve them so
because this is a work in progress I'm
going to be asking a lot of questions I
don't know that I have answers
um but I certainly will be showing some
approaches and um I really welcome uh
you know just opening up this
conversation so we can all sort of
tackle these issues together yeah yeah
so um I'll just briefly repeat that the
open source Africa library is a queer
feminist anti-racist anti-capitalist
database for 3D models of black hair
textures and styles
and uh for a little background a few
years prior so last year I I got um in
2020 I got a a hellmann fellowship award
to do some of this work and I actually
had been thinking about this problem for
a while because back in 2017 I was doing
a residency with laboratory in Spokane
and I was creating a VR piece called in
passing and it was all about how we
navigate public space based on our
perceived identities and our
self-identifications and the rift that
exists between the two and so I was
using these sort of personal
testimonials and these narratives but I
was keeping things Anonymous so I needed
to create these 3D models that were
representative of like physically
representative of the communities I was
you know um collaborating with
um you know but didn't exactly represent
or look like them wasn't the same
likeness so I was um you know using
these different like 3D modeling
platforms because I'm not a 3D modeler I
was like basically using these character
creators I felt like I was really like
hacking it like everybody looked really
different it was like really good until
it got to the hair and I had you know
black characters and I didn't have any
black hair really and so um I started to
go on these 3D asset warehouses
um so I could get more variety for my
characters and I was really
taken aback by what I saw
um and so basically and I'll show some
examples of this but I I realized
immediately that even searching for
black hair I was running into these like
social cultural issues
um so I want to talk a little bit about
just the idea of search and how search
algorithms work and I'm definitely
building off of the work of Sofia Noble
and 2018 she released the book
algorithms oppression of Oppression
which really
um brought to the fore this idea of the
populist algorithm and the problem with
that
um I believe was in 2009 she was um I
believe she was caretaking some uh black
relatives and uh she was looking for
content for them to engage with so she
does a Google search for black girls and
instead of finding these you know
pictures of Innocence she's finding you
know pornographic results and so she
repeats the process with Latina girls
and Asian girls and you know compared to
white girls we're getting completely
different results when you look for
white girls you know you're seeing what
you would expect from such an innocuous
term
and so this really got me thinking about
how you know because our search
algorithms are designed to serve a user
the most relevant information as quickly
as possible that you know relevance
becomes determined by popularity right
so the more people who click on a result
than the higher that result ranks on a
page and so what this does is it creates
a structure where the majority of users
get to Define cultural meaning and
relevance for terms like black girl or
in my case for black hair and this is
something that I found
um uh repeated when I went to these 3D
3D asset marketplaces
so going back to like terms
um the first thing that I thought to do
of course when I go to to this
Marketplace is I go into their little
search bar and I'm looking for black
hair because black hair that's that's
what it is
um but I quickly realized that black was
not a
um cultural identifier and so if you
look at like when uh this page of
results
um I think it's like a little over a
third of these are actually just like
not people at all it's just animals so
it's like fur is being coated as hair so
we've got a horse we've got a few rats
we've got interestingly enough a
hairless white cat uh we've got a cow
and then you see some images
um of Blackness but then okay so here's
a black person apparently but then
they're bald so the hair is not a
component
um and then you have of course like
black being used as a description of
color right so just um the hair the hair
color is black it's not has nothing to
do with the texture or the culture and
the this result is actually um these are
recent so we'll see more animals
um and you can recreate this I think I
did this like a week ago or something
like that so they're um uh this is
basically what you get when you search
right now oh what happened there
oh sorry I have a
there's a little bit of a delay on my
screen okay so
um and we do see even in these results a
couple that are like getting in the
realm of what I'm looking for okay
here's some black hair here's some black
hair like in the way that I mean and
we've got this character back here
um
so
once I saw that there was an issue with
black hair I started to think about like
okay well what you know how does someone
who's not black think about Blackness so
that I can sort of find it and so I
think I tried kinky hair and um I
started to try I realized I started
trying things like like African-American
hair even though I'm not really looking
for African American like I'm looking
for hair I'm not looking for like nation
states and I'm not look looking for
ethnicities but I'm trying to get into
the head of like this you know
hypothetical non-black person who
presumably you know built these kinds of
sites so I finally set on afro hair and
it's a moment where I think I'm just so
brilliant like yes afro that'll get it
because afro is also a hairstyle
and so here are the results for afro
hair
and so we're getting closer right like
this is you know we're seeing more hair
almost the entire page is like black
people
um but let's look a little bit more
closely at the results
so I'm bringing back this image again
because I want to point out that even
though this is a hairstyle that like is
within the vein of things that I'm
looking for it also comes with this like
kind of hypersexualized what I what I
read as like an anime teen body and so
even though I'm looking for hair I'm
like why do I have to look at this like
naked young woman like who is this for
um and then we see things like this
where this is uh afro hair messy
this is not afro hair to me this looks
like someone stuck their finger in an
electrical socket and you know like this
to me is not authentic representation I
don't know anybody's afro who looks like
this
um and then again you can see the
features that you know uh to me this is
the chocolate dip Barbie where it's like
brown skin but features that aren't
typically
um uh black again you see with this
character so this is clearly like a
white woman and I don't know what's
going on that is also not an afro
one of my favorites black male afro head
Joe
I I don't even know where to begin with
Joe but you can see too that because I'm
having to use the term afro that I'm
getting like literal afros because again
searching for black hair doesn't
um you know it's not related as a
cultural identifier
so here's one and I like this model
because you know this is a pretty
sophisticated rendering of a black woman
with pretty typical black features but
then the hair
um it kind of looks like she has this
short cropped afro based on the textures
that are used but then she's got this
sort of bun ponytail thing and again not
accurate you know black people we have
hair when you smooth it into a ponytail
it's smooth right you wouldn't have this
sort of close crop shave and then like a
ponytail so again it's not accurate and
it's certainly not authentic
and then when we get into higher quality
models right like and I say higher
quality in terms of like the the
um sculpt sophistication
um we still get into this caricature we
have this character who's definitely
supposed to be coded as like some you
know uh in prison name is Bubba we've
got the brutalist background the gold
tooth and like the sort of menacing
exaggerated features
so we're getting into the realm of uh
racial caricature
um and we can also see this again with
the uh this pregnant couple
um here again let's take a look at her
hair and by the way this is for afro
hair this isn't searching for people
it's just afro hair so we see this weird
afro that's a mullet we see these
cornrows but then it's like I don't know
if people remember Rugrats the like
Cynthia doll where it's like the it's
like bald and then there's cornrows it
makes no sense
um
yeah so here's some of the
representation we have so we have an
instance of like maybe the ideal this
black woman's hair I love it that I love
this model love everything about it but
it sits next to these depictions that I
don't want to see that can be harmful
and damaging especially thinking you
know back to the idea of the the black
girl the actual black girls who maybe
want to get into making games or 3D work
and then in order to see themselves they
also have to see these other kinds of
depictions of how you know the dominant
group views them
and then looking at this model more
closely she's really stunning I love her
she's beautiful
she's also six hundred dollars so not
exactly accessible and also brings up
some some other issues that I have with
these kinds of sites
um
so again I felt like it was already an
issue when I had to search for Blackness
right like how do I see myself not just
what is my self-conception but actually
like how do I find myself in this space
of black virtuality on these sites like
I have to get into you know du bois's
concept of the double Consciousness
right and I feel like I was performing
double Consciousness just by going
through the process of searching
but then seeing the results also kind of
externalizes it and makes it you know
turns into this like material this
digital material and it just started a
lot of um thoughts in me it got me
thinking about okay how do I if I'm
going to create my own database
um what does it look like to decolonize
that design process not just the results
but the actual experience of moving
through a platform like this
um what is the distinction between
caretaking and gatekeeping so again when
I'm creating the open source afro hair
Library you know it's meant to be open
source it's meant to be open it's meant
for people to be able to use these
models and
um but also
I you know I don't want to create a
proprietary relationship to Blackness I
don't want to possess blackness
but coming from a culture that is
historically you know culturally
exploited what is my responsibility to
caretake and Steward
um that culture right
um and then thinking about all of that I
thought okay how can I build a resource
of refusal and I'll I'm still unpacking
what that means but I'll get into in a
sec
so this brings me back to this idea of
like really focusing on the platform
right like if I'm going to
if I'm going to make this this database
how can I do something differently
number one how do I construct a resource
if I don't actually want you to find
what you're looking for right if I'm
trying to push back against the populist
search algorithm
to give you an example some more
examples this is some of what people are
looking for this is what's being made
and this is what you can find
um now some of these uh databases have
heard about my project and have started
to do some work but this is these are
the images I'm showing you now are from
my original search not my original
search but my research in 2019 so still
only a couple of years ago we have a
black Mammy figure
we have
minstrels
we have a black woman who has an
authentic hairstyle
um and I believe it's a 3D scan so she's
got braids similar to mine but then
she's spread eagle completely naked and
her wrist and her neck are bound with
rope
and then there's a lot of this sort of
thing where it's this generic tribal
primitive black person and the
completely non-descript but it's like
there is some grass throw an animal
print and like they're black now even
though this person has no black features
and then this sort of vaguely menacing
face I mean it's really comical here
because if you're goofy but you know the
intention is that it's supposed to be
this threatening Savage character
um so you know basically it's easier to
find minstrels and mammies on these
sites than it is to find a twist out or
um individuals or a nice fade
so why don't I want to give you what
you're looking for it's because what
you're looking for might be racist
and then this is the other issue going
back to how much it costs to get these
assets
you know there's kind of a problem with
buying and selling black bodies even in
a virtual space so you know one uh
solution maybe that could have been
proposed to this problem is always the I
mean this is very common in Tech there's
always the diversity solution right it's
like we need more representation so you
know
um we could have said well let's just
get more authentic images of Blackness
which is what's happening now which is
why you see the single again just the
one black model with like a really
beautiful twist out and really lovely
curls so it's like let's add more black
people to the space
um but I actually don't want black
bodies to exist in that space at all
because I don't like the the logic of
the platform
um so you know thinking again about like
how do I get past my sort of default
assumptions about what could happen and
conceive as something new and hopefully
better
so I'm going to take a brief detour on
my time okay so I'm gonna take a brief
detour
um from my presentation because I just
want to show you some mock-ups again
this is a work in progress I'm just
showing you this is all unreleased um
but I want to talk about the way that
I'm sort of navigating the design
um
process
so um for the open source afro hair
library site itself
um there's different ways that we're
thinking about building out this
database so um
Maybe This Is It
one second
so
I'm really sensitive to the idea that
Blackness is so often extracted from
black people and so I thought you know
in this process so I'm collaborating
with black 3D artists and that's how
we're developing the models to see the
library
um I I really want to make sure that the
artist is platformed I want to make sure
that this is a a non-neutral space and
that it has a voice and has a strong
voice so every time you see a model it's
always associated with the artist so
Chris Berry Jenkins it's not actually
our 3D model but um we always have the
artist here this would be where their
artist statement goes you see the series
of models that they're creating and so
again you always see that the artist is
just as important as the product I don't
want to have an again even myself I
don't have an extractive relationship to
the artists that I work with where it's
just here's the results but you know the
artist is is laboring in the background
I want them to be highly present in the
site instead of having a search bar
we're thinking about things like how we
can use a tag system to filter so
instead of a user coming to the site and
saying I want to have you know a giant
lollipop afro you don't get that instead
you have to the very process of using
the site requires you to understand and
learn the language of black hair so
we're looking at how to filter through
hairstyles
um and you can see sorry you can see
this in our um even the way the model
page is set up um where you would see
the the type of hairstyle so these you
know this would fall under twist or
bantu knots
um that's one way that you can uh sort
of search for models or find models and
then the other way is by actually just
looking at the artists themselves so you
would go to the artist page and then you
would see something like this with all
of their models that you can select
through and then their artist statement
would be here and then you know
utilitarian stuff like the poly counts
and all of that would be
um secondary information but again
really highlighting the artist's work
and the artists themselves
um I want to share a little bit about
um how we're even treating the um the
application process so you know I'm an
academic I'm an academic and you know
I've been in Fine Arts for a while so
I'm used to a certain kind of
application process and I'm one that
doesn't make me actually that
comfortable so I wanted to open up this
space to folks who aren't already
um sort of socialized in that way so I
wanted to I'm really a big fan of
creating very simple straightforward
applications and so I think this one is
three questions the first one you know
talks about our political goals and how
that aligns with with our collaborators
the second one asks you know if people
have afro-textured hair themselves or an
intimate understanding of the way it
moves its body because you know we
really want to put that to the
foreground but then my favorite question
is would you under any circumstances put
raisins in the potato salad and I think
it's important to ask questions like
this yes this is actually like probably
the most important question in the
entire application process because it's
speaking you know unapologetically to
the fact that this is rooted in Black
Culture not just the facade of it but
really like being immersed in that space
and caring about the nuances and the
details and being kind of funny
[Music]
um
so the other thing that I want to
mention thinking back to this this idea
of refusal I'm still thinking about how
we're going to display these 3D models
um of course we're going to have a 3D
viewer where you can rotate everything
and see it in 360. but I thought you
know it would be lovely if the way that
we started the models was actually
facing away from you so even though
these are digital objects and this is
something that's a through line in all
of my work these representations of
Blackness that still I still want to
keep the humanity so even though they're
you know their characters I want them to
feel like people I almost want the these
objects to have a sort of agency so as
you can see from uh this is the
announcement from the first Fellowship
we've got all of the characters facing
away from you which I think is really
powerful I think that
um the gesture of having to flip and
rotate that character to face you to
really see them can be a powerful one
um so these are one this is you know
just a few strategies that I'm taking
um in terms of developing just the the
user experience and the site navigation
uh yeah okay I'm so close on time so
what I'm gonna do is I'm going to shift
over and so you've seen some of the
models but I'm going to show you some
stuff that we haven't uh um uh haven't
shared with folks
and show you some of the models that
were actually created so we've only had
one
um uh osall Fellowship so far which is
the program it's a res it's a remote
residency for um black 3D artists and it
was really successful we had the artists
from all around the world it was
incredible to be to share that space
with them and here's some of the stuff
that uh they came up with
so this is an artist uh working out of
Belgium Malika Matumbo and uh her work
is she's really interested in fantasy
and almost the kind of these these
monstrous phantasms like her uh there's
something I don't want to say creepy but
transfixing actually about this work
really captivating and the name of the
series is trans fiction
um because she wanted something that
felt fantasy but also
um a kind of everyday aspiration
something that was that was both
fantastic but but
um uh that you can actually do a way
that you could actually wear your hair
um here are a couple of other models
from her series
I just I love this work so much
here are some models uh from H.D Harris
uh they created the series future proof
with the idea that black drip is never
Obsolete and uh black people use our
hair as technology and we'll further
continue to do that in the future
yeah
and so you can see it's not just about
the hair it's really about you know
coming up like building worlds right and
and building out these futures
uh you can't see this one so well but
these are actually these holographic
whales in this whole Oceanic um theme
it's really uh beautiful
and then the last one I'll show you is
from uh evening cicada so this artist uh
was this is from the afro Mythic Series
so taking
um mythical creatures and tales of lore
from um uh many different cultures and
then giving them a kind of like an
Afrocentric twist and I always get the
name of this wrong I think it's the
aqua acrobomelo something like that it's
uh the Scorpion man translated into this
black Femme character and using these
like really beautiful poodle Puffs and I
just I love this because we need more
black fantasy right
um yeah
and this final image uh My Little My
small little Act of refusal here for you
uh is by an artist a super fuchsia or
DeAndre Rose
um and you can see more of this work
at on Twitter so I have shared more
images on Twitter um at afro hair
library or you can follow the project uh
by going to Africa library.org and
that's my presentation thank you
foreign
that was fantastic
um it was so cool to see some of the
upcoming projects in the afro hair
Library it's such an important project
and I think you know it's really
exciting to talk to you about it you
know uh especially you know we just
spoke to La Janae McMillan right before
and she's working on a uh they're
working on a similar project
um not so similar but you know in terms
of archiving and digitizing and
preserving and caring for black movement
and dance you know another kind of black
technology that has been appropriated
um violence had violence done to for for
centuries
um oh
can I on that note I just there was one
point that I think because it's fully
related so um
the way that I picture uh this resource
working is I actually want to instead of
people sort of coming to the site
um with their preconceived notions of
Blackness and then just like finding
those I wanted to feel like you're
opening up a Vogue spread I wanted to
sort of Challenge and inspire people and
I also am intentionally designing it as
a rabbit hole to get lost in so one
thing I didn't show you was this mock-up
which is like you don't just start with
the models you come here and then you
see some history of black hair you you
know read an article about the politics
of black hair you get some wonderful
beautiful quotes from James James
Baldwin
um and then you get to the models and
then maybe you get to like a playlist of
up-and-coming you know artists and
musicians and things like that so
um and I and I was thinking about it
when you brought up legendary because
back to that idea of caretaking right
like how can this be a community site
like a site of Education right and
knowledge building and knowledge sharing
but that one that that sort of through
its design forces you to get enough
to get entangled to get lost instead of
just saying oh I'm coming here I'm
grabbing my Afro and I'm throwing it in
my work and I'm leaving you know
um yeah so I think that's that's a lot
of that's where we have a lot of um
commonality between myself and
legendary's work
that's really cool to you know to hear
that to hear about that commonality and
you know that's something that I was
thinking about a lot in kind of
anticipation for for today
um but the thing that you know you know
you're talking about
in talking you know you were talking
about how like this is something that
really strikes me and I haven't totally
brought my head around yet you know how
black bodies were bought and purchased
and sold digitally as well and that is
such a huge problem
um and you know for instance I there's a
video game that I love to play It's
called Watch Dogs 2
um and you play as a you play as a black
character the main character is black
he's an Oakland based hacker
um and kind of a badass and you know
he's a wonderful character but you know
I I've been you know I was taking
screenshots and Screen recordings and
all these things and I was like I was
you know what does it mean for me as a
white person to be playing as his black
character like if I'm going to represent
my experience doing this like what that
you know what are the ethics around like
how to do this and at the same time as
that and you know this is a mass-market
video game that is you know it's a
triple a studio it's been played by
hundreds of thousands if not millions of
people of all Races genders colors Etc
um and on top and so like in building a
Marketplace an opera Source Library
where people can take assets like which
is the role that you know I this term is
kind of one that's used in in media
studies around this topic but like
racial tourism
um or kind of the appropriation and the
purchasing of these assets for people to
use to embody themselves virtually like
how do you navigate that side of this
conversation
so you know
yeah I mean there's a lot there and I
have some I have a few different
thoughts but one of them is like there's
a reason why these models are not for
sale why they'll be you know free I
don't want it to be a transaction like
you give me money and I give you
Blackness you know and again I don't
want to have a proprietary relationship
where I own these things and no one can
use them
um or even only black people can use
them that sort of thing I've been
thinking a lot about this
and I think I'm gonna probably piss off
like a contingent of folks who are in
open source because I've really been
thinking especially as we see what's
going on with nfts like
we need some restrictions on this
openness
and I've been really trying to think
about and look toward um indigenous
peoples and like you know they've been
practicing
communal resource protection for
centuries and ways that don't impose you
know the logic of ownership
um and you know
also like black folks you know if you
come from a community that has
historically been economically and
culturally exploited you know that you
it would be irresponsible to just be
completely open because in order to
sustain something for Generations in
order to make sure that your culture
your knowledge all of it survives
um you have to protect it from
exploitation and eradication so you know
I've kind of there's people are asking
me like when is this this Library going
to come out and right now I'm shooting
for summer of 2023 but I'm glad that
I've been taking my time because another
big area of This research is thinking
about the licensing and thinking about
the ethics of access and you know coming
up with with licenses that
um
not just anticipate the future because I
think that that you know there's a
limitation there but I'm trying to think
about models of consent and how we
should build that into our licensing you
know should licensing be ongoing and
granted enthusiastically and revocable
so you know and again like I don't have
the answers but like I'm I want to be in
conversation because I think this is
something we all really have to think
about that we can how do you ensure the
resource I think about like the Paradox
if the Paradox of Tolerance is that you
know you can't tolerate the intolerant
or else tolerance will disappear then
what happens to open source when you
know artists and developers feel that
they need to pull their stuff from
public domain and add these new
restrictive licenses because you know
they're concerned about misuse and abuse
of what they're building and so just
being a black person I'm like we this is
it I don't want to create another
Pathway to just having you know AAA
companies or anyone extract this
Blackness put in their game and then
never hire black people and never engage
with black people or black community or
never invest in black folks and black
community I also you know have to
contend with like okay well what happens
if it's just like someone uses these
beautiful models like to create racism
simulator 3000 you know which is also
just like Call of Duty or whatever like
we already have this we already have
like brown people shimb up like that
that happens
um so I don't really have again like I
don't have the answers there's just
things I'm thinking about because I
don't think you know we shouldn't make
the work we need to build our archives
but we do need to think a little bit
about like and disentanging the the
notion of gatekeeping from caretaping
caretaking and what that looks like
it's also like a Monumental
responsibility like that just I mean I
obviously you're bringing in artists but
is it mostly just you and your research
like
how like what kind of support do you
have to take this on
yeah I mean well that's the thing I'm
not doing this by myself
um so even with the mod I'm not a 3D
modeler so what we do is you know once
we go through the fellowship process
um I work with artists I talk to them we
talk about like what are like we have
intimate conversations about like our
versions of Blackness and what's really
nice about um as one of our fellows
pointed out and like our like second or
third meeting or something was being in
a space where it's all black people
you can also be critical and you can
also fight and you can disagree and you
can like work out because there's not
this gaze there's not this like oh we've
got to get everything perfect because
someone hears this you know it's not
like it's like okay we're all family
like let's let's talk it out like let's
talk about like what the benefits are
um to doing things in different ways um
and negotiate that
um
yeah
sorry remind me of your like I have ADHD
I was just asking yeah I mean it sounds
like there is like a collectiveness
that's happening but in terms of these
bigger sort of issues in in terms of
like authorship and like
how like
working with this is why it has to be a
community project yeah um and it has to
be done collectively so beyond just
working with 3D artists I mean this is
also why I'm thinking about like I like
that it's Global I want it to be
diasporic
um I you know want to make sure that
artists regardless of experience or
whether they've been professionalized or
whether they've gone to you know through
formal education or whatever it's all
have access to the space and you know as
I um continue to scale these fellowships
I really want to work not just with
folks in Tech so I don't think of this
as like a tech project I don't think of
this as just for 3D artists I also want
to have fellowships that include you
know black writers that include black
hair stylists and collaborate with folks
who you know are are working with actual
black hair because all of us really need
to be part of that conversation
um this is where I'm really inspired by
um processing foundation and just like
well you know I'm friends with Lauren
McCarthy who's amazing and I adore her
and like the way that she talks about
things about contribution right that
everyone's a contributor right it's you
know whether you're giving a workshop or
you're setting something up or what
whether you're adding to the code base
or whatever like that we need everyone
and so I really love that idea and
making sure that this is about black
community and black people primarily
um regardless of sort of technical
skills you know because there's
different ways to contribute right and
so black folks are constantly making and
remaking culture and so I want every one
of us to be part of that conversation
and also I want co-conspirators you know
to be supporting that work and I think
one of the steps that I haven't quite
figured out yet but I've been tooling
with because people always ask me like
okay I'm not I'm not black how do I help
and I think that
one of the ways I think you know I want
to approach that is by having non-black
folks because we I want to provide
material and communal support for black
people especially that material part
like give black people money it's
important
and for non-black folks I really like
the idea of like folks investing their
time and investing their knowledge into
the space without necessarily taking
something out of it
um so yeah those are just that's that's
how I'm thinking about it so far
wow I mean it's so complex and it's you
know something that as you said doesn't
have a definite answer right now and
we're still trying to think through what
those Protocols are going to look like
and I love that you mentioned like the
licensing and you know how we can think
through alternative modes of Licensing
where there's mutability involved and
you know we were talking earlier this
morning with Kia koitler about Dows and
the possibility for blockchain and more
transparent Community decision making
um and permissions and not seeing you
know and you know as these different
ideas are kind of starting to congeal
you know I'm starting to see linkages
between like how we might be able to use
technology to write different kinds of
rules and regulations different kinds of
uh protocols that really involve all of
the members of the community in a way
that feels Equitable that is transparent
and that you know makes it very clear
where these odd digital objects are
going how they're being used and you
know what's what's happening to them
um you know I'd love to uh also ask you
um
I think that
no let me back this up a little bit I
mean this is this the way that you're
thinking through representation in
Virtual Space is really profound
um and I think that's something that's
represented through all of your Works
whether it's yay or nay and the way that
you're thinking through language and you
know and pop culture and and and this
ionic soul of the kind of intertwined
um and works like fairly intelligent
Tech and um the work that you're showing
as part of the Great area Festival
exhibition with the Snapchat filters
um you know I want to go back to this
idea of agency and that you were
discussing before and how you want these
objects to have agency
um what you know what ways you know
maybe this is maybe it's easier to
illustrate through some of your works
but how do you know do you approach this
idea of reclaiming your agency in
Virtual space
um and by like presenting yourself
presenting other people
um in ways that is that combats the
extractive exploitative you know aspects
of the algorithm systems that they're
embedded in
God this is like asking me about like
how I approach my whole existence
because like that's the thing I'm trying
to figure out no but really like when
people ask me like what's the motivation
for your work what are you I'm like I'm
just trying to get free honestly and
like for years and years and years it
was just that I was just like I just
like I feel caged by so many things
um and I just want to be free like
that's what I want that's the only thing
I want like before I die is to get free
and then you know initially because I
come from a very impoverished background
you know I'm a first generation college
student I'm a non-traditional student I
didn't
I I didn't have access to like the kind
like the kind of knowledge that I I
profess you know in classes and teaching
and things like this until I was like
25. that's when I went into undergrad so
for me it was like this huge cultural
shift and and for so many years I was
just worried about survival like so that
was the freedom it really was like okay
well you're hitting a wall you're
hitting an economic wall you're hitting
a social wall you're not allowed to be
in certain neighborhoods certain spaces
people don't respect you people don't
see you right and then as I went to UCLA
and I went to grad school the night and
you know there's other kinds of issues
that happen in these more privileged
spaces like oh well now I'm in the space
of privilege but it wasn't made for me
and my like wide hips don't fit in this
like thing that was made for these
skinny white dudes like it's not it's
not happening for me like I gotta figure
this out
um and then as I kept going and
continued to be like dissatisfied in
different ways and encounter new
barriers you know it was like first
shaking off the external then realizing
I had to confront the internalized
barriers okay and then finally finally I
think getting to this space in my I
practice where I'm like oh I'm never
going to get free unless we're all free
right so that idea of collective
Liberation on one hand and then
liberatory Praxis is like my new thing
I'm like
pre-2016 I'm sure lots of people have a
similar experience whether they're
artists or not I was really doing a lot
of work that felt like I was like
suffering for the end goal like I'm
gonna finally I'm gonna make that hard
difficult feminist work that's
anti-racist and I'm gonna convince some
let's be real some white people that I'm
a person and it's gonna make it it's
going to be worth it even though it
sucks and it's so hard and I'm suffering
and then like the election happened I
was like oh well that's never gonna work
I'll be dead by then so
it made me rethink my practice so that I
had to do work that in and of itself
was the end that liberated me through
the process and that's why I love art
show because it was so much fun to make
and it's not pretentious and it's silly
and there are parts that are so
cringe-worthy in that work like the end
I can almost never watch the end and I'm
like but I love that I did it because it
was that feeling of you know I can put
my boobs on the internet and they can be
there can be soap opera music in the
background they can have dog ears and
like that worked us so much for me in
terms of yeah I mean I've talked about
this but like um I've talked about you
know I was in an abusive relationship
and one of the things that that person
had told me was like you know never put
your boobs on the internet if you don't
want to be judged or criticized you know
this very idea of respectability and I
was like oh well I did that great or you
know
um thinking about like what it means to
have a couple of degrees now and be like
a fancy respectable black person like I
don't want to be a respectable person of
any kind like so no I'm gonna do the
silly work so I think for me
what it means to like reclaim my agency
is honestly really sitting with the
things that I'm afraid of and then
trying to find out where they where they
come from and like this is my I'd like
to think and I hope people feel this way
I think that my work is political
without being preachy because I'm never
coming from an outsider's perspective
anything that I'm doing I'm always
coming from something that started
within me some critique that I felt or
some critique that I was responding to
some cage that maybe I built for myself
because I had you know felt these
pressures or thought I needed to contort
myself in a certain way and I really sit
with those feelings and then I try to
find out where they're I want to root
them out and then I make the work to
sort of solve it to get it out of me and
I hope that that creates like kind of a
model for folks who are feeling similar
ways to go okay that's how we can do
this
um yeah hope that answers your question
but I'm still working it out
I mean it's you know not to to use my
favorite wanky art term that I love to
use in moments like this it's a
continual process of becoming
you know it's something that is
constantly emerging out of itself that
you constantly have to battle with
um and it's I think it's hard you know
and I think that you know not to like
not to like you know contradict or like
you know drill down deeper but you know
something that is the you know the
classic institutional critique is how
can you fix something from the inside
like how can you participate in
something and then also you know seek to
make changes to it simultaneously and
like that's something that I've been
wrestling with so heavily just in the
terms of you know like social media like
I don't want to support Facebook I don't
want to support Instagram but that's
where the artists that I support and I
work with are that's how I get the word
out about them this is how I do you know
this is how I I use this to do good work
but I am still a part of the problem by
giving that platform Credence and I'm
you know I'm wondering how you know you
know especially you know in considering
how like you know you put out this
Library these assets then become you
know uh you know supposedly available to
say a triple A game Studio to not pay a
black person to do that to to to to you
know to do that work
um and how do you how do you deal with
that tension kind of with all of this I
know that's kind of a tough question but
you know it's something I've still been
wrestling with
yeah I mean I think I've always been a
bit of diversity of tactics like
I mean I've always always been like I'm
a Survivor so I will use whatever
resources are at my disposable and I and
I have no like I don't feel any shame or
guilt about that because I'm like I just
I mean I hear you on like okay well how
do you because I also use these kind of
like platforms and I think
okay this is also going to be corny but
it's like when you know better you do
better and
you should just be thoughtful about
whatever resources you have the kind of
work that I was making you know six
years ago is different than the work
that I'm making now because I was in a
different place and I knew different
things you know my work was much more
focused on my own individual like
experience and it seemed like a good
thing if I had a success but now I think
a lot more in terms of community but
that's also related to the fact that I
have more privilege and access it's a
lot easier to do that because I have
this stable I get to go to therapy you
know every two weeks I get to uh live in
a place that's stable that I don't have
a weird shitty landlord who's also like
you know uh trying to assault me you
know like I have a kind of stability in
life and so I think that
and I also have all sorts of guilt and
shame over that because as someone who
came up like with nothing it's like
really hard to be like wait I'm allowed
a luxury oh God what am I what am I
doing you know people like I deal with
all of that but then I I don't know
something happened to me and I just sort
of
decided that the best thing that I could
do is focus on what I'm good at and that
you know I have a weird relationship to
both shame and pride I think both of
them I experience them but I don't think
either of them are helpful so for me I
just try to focus on like what can I do
and this is why with osall it's not just
about working with black artists like a
big part of this is like where can I get
grant money to just give money to black
people like it's as simple as that and I
think that those material like
addressing you know the material
conditions where giving black artists
the time and space and the money to be
able to conjure their own images of
Blackness that if they're working for
another company or a company at all that
they may not be paid to do because no
one's necessarily looking to find these
beautiful depictions no one's looking to
fund these things so just giving folks
the space and the time in the community
um and I also think you know it's not on
me to solve all these damn problems it's
not on any one of us to solve these
problems like I didn't start this system
like it doesn't mean I don't have a
responsibility it just means that I
don't need to sort of beat myself up for
not even doing all of the right things
because the right thing to do is to open
up the conversation and to talk with
other people so that we get better and
better together like I
I appreciate working with others because
I appreciate the dialogue and I'm not a
person who sort of shirts away from
criticism I love that because I think of
it as an opportunity to get better and
do better so that's where I'm starting
and I when I hear other people who have
different ideas or even more radical
ideas like if somebody's like you know
what
I'm like can I curse screw all this
let's burn the system down let's burn
everything down like I'm also for that
I'm like I don't know how to do that so
I'm just going to be over here making my
little art but when the revolution comes
like okay what do you need like I'm like
I'm not trying to get in anybody else's
way
you know I
I don't know I don't think that they're
they're they're not mutually exclusive
like I think all everyone should do what
they do best do it thoughtfully I think
we do need a caretaking ethic I think we
need to be in community and I think that
we need to
um be really listening to each other's
needs and I hope I'm not causing any
harm but that's about where I'm at and
maybe in 10 years I'll be somewhere else
and I look forward to that too but this
is what I know how to do now
well you know what I'm gonna be like
tuned in with my face glued to the
screen in 10 years like wanting to keep
up with you know what the next evolution
is
um we're sadly out of time but am this
was so amazing
um and the work and the way you you know
the your approach to dealing with all of
these things in such a thoughtful
um and firm way is
so wonderful just to and and so
instructive and I you know I want to
remind everybody in the audience to give
money to black people you know one last
time let's let's drive it are you on
Facebook give some money to black people
give some money to black people tweet it
today
give some money to Blackpool well there
you go totally 100 well keep us posted
on the progress of the open source
African or the open source afro hair
Library
um and let us know you know what we can
do a great area and everywhere else to
and anywhere else to to support
um I'm excited to see kinds of the
Creations that come out of giving people
access to these unbelievable amazing and
Rich resources so thank you so so much
for being here and check out am's work
our show um in the gray area Festival
exhibition
thank you
foreign